Setting up MongoDB using Mongoose in Node.js

MongoDB is a NoSQL database that stores data in flexible, JSON-like documents. It is commonly used with Node.js for building backend applications.

Mongoose is an Object Data Modeling (ODM) library for MongoDB and Node.js. It makes it easier to work with MongoDB by allowing developers to create schemas, models, and perform database operations using JavaScript.

1. Install Mongoose

First, create a Node.js project and install Mongoose using npm:

npm install mongoose

If the project uses environment variables, dotenv can also be installed:

npm install dotenv
2. Create a MongoDB Database

A MongoDB database can be hosted locally or through MongoDB Atlas.

MongoDB Atlas is a cloud-based service that allows developers to create and manage MongoDB databases online.

After creating a cluster in MongoDB Atlas, a connection string is provided for connecting the Node.js application to the database.

The connection string can be stored in a .env file:

MONGO_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string

Sensitive information such as database passwords should not be exposed publicly.

3. Connect Node.js to MongoDB

Mongoose can be used to establish the connection.

require("dotenv").config();
const mongoose = require("mongoose");

async function connectDB() {
    try {
        await mongoose.connect(process.env.MONGO_URI);
        console.log("MongoDB connected successfully");
    } catch (error) {
        console.log("MongoDB connection failed:", error.message);
    }
}

connectDB();

The mongoose.connect() method connects the Node.js application to MongoDB using the connection string stored in the environment variable.

Using async/await makes it easier to handle the connection process.

4. Create a Schema

A schema defines the structure of the data that will be stored in MongoDB.

For example, a user schema can be created like this:

const userSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
    firstName: {
        type: String,
        required: true
    },
    lastName: {
        type: String,
        required: true
    },
    email: {
        type: String,
        required: true,
        unique: true
    },
    password: {
        type: String,
        required: true
    }
});

The schema specifies the fields, their data types, and validation requirements.

5. Create a Model

A model is created from the schema and is used to interact with the MongoDB collection.

const User = mongoose.model("User", userSchema);

The User model can now be used to create, find, update, and delete users.

For example:

const user = await User.findOne({ email });

This searches the database for a user with the specified email address.

6. Perform Database Operations

Mongoose provides several methods for working with MongoDB data.

Some common methods include:

find() — retrieves multiple documents.
findOne() — retrieves one matching document.
findById() — retrieves a document using its ID.
save() — saves a new document.
findByIdAndUpdate() — updates a document.
findByIdAndDelete() — deletes a document.

These methods allow a Node.js backend to communicate with MongoDB without writing MongoDB queries directly for every operation.

Conclusion

Setting up MongoDB with Mongoose allows a Node.js application to store and manage data efficiently. MongoDB provides the database, while Mongoose provides schemas, models, validation, and convenient methods for interacting with the database.

In my Credit-line News Network backend project, I used MongoDB and Mongoose to store users and news articles. Mongoose was also used to perform database operations such as creating, reading, updating, and deleting news.